I had a call from Acting President B.W.
Williams saying, I want to see you in my office at 8 o'clock in the morning.
And so I knew I was in big trouble.
And I talked to some of the other people in the department, and one of the people was named Al Jackie.
I don't know whether you knew Al Jackie or not, but Al said, I'll go with you.
And I said, Al, this is my problem.
No, he said, this is the chemistry department's problem, and I insist I'll go with you.
So, I couldn't dissuade him.
So, at eight o'clock, he and I walked into E.W.
Williams' office and sat down, and Williams was furious.
He gave me a lecture for at least thirty minutes.
of how you do things in a decent university, and how I had not done things properly, and the administration was looking out for the good of the chemistry department, and I was questioning them and all sorts of things like that.
And I had to wait until he got through, and so when he got through, I said, Dr. Williams, I want to ask you one question.
Who is paying this new head of the chemistry department that you're going to hire?
And he said, oh, A&M is going to pay it.
And I said, no.
A&M is going to pay half his salary.
The Wells Foundation is going to pay half his salary.
And as best I can determine, that's completely illegal.
And somebody is going to get into big trouble.
And the Welsh Foundation has no business dickering around with our activities in the chemistry department, certainly not picking a new head without us being considered at all.
And he said, oh, I think the Welsh Foundation is just going to give us the money, and we're going to turn it over.
And I said, that's not the way it operates with the Welsh Foundation.
When they do something like that, they expect something in return, and you're getting yourself in the big trouble, and you better do some checking.
And he looked real kind of pale for a little bit.
Finally he said, let me do some checking and I'll get back with you.
Two days later we got a note from the president's office saying the Welch Foundation has withdrawn their offer of support and this man is no longer being considered as the next head of the chemistry department.
Now, Milligan knew what was going on exactly, and he knew I was involved.
And so it came time, shortly after that, to submit proposals for renewal of my research grant.
And amazingly enough, I got a letter from them saying, we'd be pleased to have you submit another proposal for renewal of your research, a search grant.
You said D.W.
Williams.
Did you mean Jack Williams?
No.
Or it was D.W.?
D.W.
Back in the 50s.
That's right.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, this was about 58, somewhere along in there.
The chemistry department began to make great progress in growth and development and research and all during the Rudder-Wayne Hall years.
That's true.
Absolutely true.
All right.
What about then in the years of Jack Williams?
in the 70s.
Martell still there?
No, Martell was going strong.
And John Calhoun?
I didn't see any significant changes in our department.
What did you and your colleagues think of President Williams and Vice President Calhoun's leadership?
Williams, I never got to know very well at all, personally at all.
Calhoun was one of my neighbors.
I lived only a block from him, and he and I have always been good personal friends, but I have some real reservations about Calhoun.
Dick Winerti was one of the key researchers, and you smile about Dick.
Yeah, I never could quite figure Winarty out.
I can remember, I never had much contact with him.
I knew him, met him.
We used to have university dances and things like that, so I knew Winarty and his wife very well.
One day he called me over to his office and
I don't know till this day what that call was all about, but all I can say in recollection of what was said to me that day, it appeared to me that he had the opinion that I had some clout around the campus that I didn't feel I had, and he was playing up to me in some way.
That's about the only personal situation I had with Winarty.
But again, that left a bad taste in my mouth, because he was expecting something, I think, in return, and I didn't know what it was.
And shortly after that, he went to Houston, and so that was the end of that.
Looking back over, because you served as an active member of the faculty until what year?
77.
Until 77.
All right, so 25 years.
That's right.
In that quarter century, looking back, what were the key positive decisions that the university made in those years?
Oh, two or three, absolutely no question.
The admission of women brought in all kinds of bright females who didn't just come because there were boys there.
I had women in my organic chemistry class that were wanting to get in vet school, and they were top-notch.
Quality gals came to A&M.
Certainly, accepting blacks and anybody else who wants to come for my feelings was a major step in the right direction.
You couldn't go on.
I was on the school board at A&M Consolidated when we integrated the school over there, and it was high time, you know.
We had the expense of trying to fund two schools when there were only about 100 total black people over there.
And that's stupidity as far as I'm concerned.
And so, yeah, admitting women and certainly the making the core optional played a major role.
Did we miss any opportunities in those years that you can think of?
Once this got started, things moved
Nicely, and I don't, looking back, I'm sure we missed some opportunities, but I don't know that they were major opportunities at all.
Should we have allowed the enrollment to get to the limit it is now?
No, not in my opinion.
It's my feeling that somewhere around 30,000 quality students makes a university big enough that it can offer everything that a good university ought to offer, and anything beyond that begins to create more chaos than anything else.
That's just my personal feeling.
How would we have selected under
the optimum circumstances, how would we have selected the 30,000 students?
At that time, that would have been tough because I've been told by students over the years, A&M is the place to go.
If you can get into A&M, A&M offers something that no other schools, one or two things that no other school really offers, it's the right place to go.
In your own research, what were some key proud moments for you in your own research?
What was your first big research accomplishment and then go on?
I did a number of things.
I was one of these people that didn't stick in a single field.
If somebody brought to me a research project that was interesting and wanted my help as people in oceanography did on a number of occasions, Don Hood.
and I worked together on projects on a number of occasions that had absolutely no relation to what I was doing.
I improved the process for carbon-14 analysis determination of
age of organic objects.
I thought that was a real good piece of work that I did.
We don't need it anymore.
We've got more very elegant electronic equipment that can do it without my work.
I came out of Monsanto very interested in working on
compounds that had this carbon phosphorus bond in it because there was no one in the U.S.
doing that at that time.
And so one of the things I decided, wanted to do out of pure curiosity, you can
make sort of structural equivalents of our amino acids that make up all the proteins in our body.
You can make them from organophosphorus compounds, replacing the carboxylic acid group in an amino acid with a phosphonic acid group.
And we knew, we talked about this at Monsanto before I left there, but there seemed to be no dollar sign in front of this.
So you make a number of amino phosphonic acids that are similar to glycine and alanine and tyrosine and so forth.
They're interesting compounds and they might have the possibility of some interesting biological properties.
But it's a pretty long shot, so I decided to do this when I got here.
And I was able to come up with a synthesis, a very general synthesis, to make these compounds.
And we made about 50 of them, I guess.
All kinds of...
variations and modifications, and we made some that were analogs of naturally occurring amino acids, analog of glassine and alanine and so forth.
And one of the naturally occurring amino acids is beta alanine.
It has an amino group one carbon further down the carbon chain.
There's a total of
three carbons.
There's a carboxylic acid, two carbons, and an amino on the end.
All the other amino acids have the amino on the first carbon atom from the carboxylic acid.
Anyway, we made the analog of beta-alanine, which is two-aminoethyl phosphonic acid, and published it, and
Then I picked up a chemical abstract journal one day, and there was an abstract of an article that had been published in Japan from the University of Tokyo by two Japanese chemists, one by the name of Masaki Horiguchi and
And the other, his prof was Kandatsu.
And they had found, of all things, this 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid in the rumen of ruminating animals.
And they had come to the conclusion that they had been synthesized in the rumen, and you have some strange critters.
microorganisms, they're a little higher in the scale than bacteria, but they found that these were capable of synthesizing this compound just from inorganic phosphate, sodium phosphate, something like that.
Now, why would an organism in the ruminating atom like a cow or a deer
go out of its way, not to make small amounts, they made large amounts.
I mean, really large amounts.
Well, we don't, to this day, we don't know the complete answer to this story, but in any event,
I read this first and I said, oh, those guys are wrong.
Aminophosphonic acids don't occur in nature.
And so I sat down and wrote to Horiguchi and said, I have read your article.
It's a very interesting article because
We have been working on the synthesis of amino phosphonic acids, among which we have synthesized two amino ethyl phosphonic acid.
They had identified it not by getting any quantity that they could even see.
They had identified it by measuring its physical behavior and chromatographic systems and things like that.
It behaved exactly like
synthetic 2-aminoethyl phosphonic acid and they concluded incorrectly that it was that compound.
I didn't believe that they were right and so I said I've got large amounts of 2-aminoethyl phosphonic acid willing to send you any amounts you'd like to have to compare with your results.
They had
They had never isolated any measurable amount of it.
Well, it turned out they were right.
It is there.
Not only is it there, it's in a lot of places.
It's in oysters, it's in clams, all kinds of marine organisms, sea anemones, sea pansies, all kinds of things.
And in the
organs of humans.
You can isolate it from, oh, it's present in milk, a fairly large amount of it in cow's milk.
So when you drink cow's milk, you get a pretty good slug of it and the body puts it into the heart, the liver, all kinds.
It's been isolated from all sorts of human organs.
No one to this day really knows for sure
what this stuff is doing and why an organism like a sea anemone or something like that would go out of its way to synthesize a compound that it doesn't seem to use to any significant degree.
It has it in the organism, but anyway, that was a fun deal.
Other research accomplishments you're proud of?
I may be the proudest of all of my research accomplishments was that project at Monsanto.
That synthesis of nerve gas was a fun job to do, a frightening job to do at times, an exceedingly difficult job.
But we had 12 people in there that worked together absolutely wonderfully.
And that's what research is all about when you can get everybody involved in a project like that to really contribute.
All right.
With students here, what are some of the doctoral students that you enjoyed working most?
And where are they now?
Well, the student that developed this synthesis of these amino phosphonic acids was my first real graduate student.
His name was James Chambers, and he came to me from a little Seventh-day Adventist school out of West of Fort Worth or near Fort Worth.
He left here and was teaching at a Seventh-day Adventist college in Walla Walla, Washington.
Now he's retired now, I'm sure.
He was no youngster when he came to me.
He was a very, very excellent student.
I had a boy who had been badly crippled with, what was he, crippling disease?
Polio?
Polio, yeah, when he was young.
He could just barely walk.
His legs were all twisted up.
He was an absolutely wonderful experimentalist.
Unfortunately, he came down with, I guess, liver cancer.
This poor guy, he really got the bad end of the deal and died a few years ago in his home in Colorado.
These were two of them.
I had a young Armenian kid by the name of Marijanian, who was an excellent laboratory man.
I had a Greek student, and I'm not sure exactly how he got here, but he ended up here, I think it was at the University of Tennessee in some way.
got over here and worked for me.
Constantinos Scratas was his name.
How do you spell it?
Do you know?
S-C-R-E-T-T-A-S.
Scratas.
Constantinos with a K or a C?
C. Had a South Korean student.
who did some beautiful work on separating the optically active isomers of one of these synthetic amino phosphonic acids, and he went back.
He was teaching at the University of, let's see,
one of the universities right in Seoul, University of Seoul, I guess it was.
And he went back there and he's retired now.
He was an older man.
In all of your teaching days, surely you must have had some interesting experiences.
Can you share some perhaps one-of-a-kind Aggie experiences that would have maybe humor or serious or sad moments?
In my research activities?
No, not necessarily.
Oh, just... Classroom and working with students.
I'll tell you one that I'll always remember.
Uh...
I was teaching first few years I was teaching freshman chemistry and I had a big class and I had consecutive classes on consecutive hours and I was at the end of one of the classes and was standing up by my desk talking to some students before they left and other students were coming in and I laid my grade book on the table and looked around and the grade book wasn't there.
So I inquired of the people in the room if they knew where my grade book was.
No one did.
And some students said, it was toward almost the end of the semester, and somebody said, you don't have any grades.
How are you going to give grades in the course?
And I said, well, as of right now, everybody has an F.
because I don't have any idea what else, what grade to give anybody.
This kid ran after him.
At the end of the next class, I went to my office, and before I went in my office, I could see my grade book.
sticking under my door.
And I picked it up and looked at it and it was pretty obvious that one of the students had changed one of his grades.
He had done a very bad job.
It was a student in that first class and he had changed it just enough.
I think at the time you didn't have to take the final exam if you had a certain grade.
And he had raised his
grade on one or two of his exams just enough that he was not going to, he was going to be exempt and take an exam.
And so I had one other class, the students, and I called this student over and I said, I know exactly what you did.
And I could cause you real trouble by reporting you to the authorities because you did things that good Aggies don't do.
But I'm not going to do anything except you get an F in the course.
You had a B in the course.
I hope that you'll remember this because you didn't have to do that to get a pretty good grade.
And so two or three years later, I was walking.
I lived that time over on Marsteller.
I was walking to work one morning and just as I walked inside the campus, a car stopped there.
And a boy and a girl were in the car and this fellow leaned out and he said, I'll take you over to the chemistry department.
And there was this boy.
And I was a little surprised and got in the car and he said,
You don't have to be coy about anything.
This is my wife that we just married recently.
She knows the story.
He said, probably is the best thing that ever happened to me in my life.
I've never done a stupid thing like that again.
So once in a while something pays off like that.
Did any students ever try any tricks in your class that you can recall?
Any Aggie good bull?
Pranks?
Not really.
I was all business in my class.
When I walked in class, I felt I had the responsibility to teach these kids as best I could and give them all my time up to doing that.
And I was awfully hard on them.
I expected good performance.
But I finally told, last years I taught organic chemistry, sophomore organic chemistry that pre-meds and pre-vets and pre-dental students, chem engineers I believe all took this course and these were all people
Except the chem engineers were fighting for good grades to get into a professional school.
And so grades were very important to them.
And I worked out a system that I used in that class that worked really well.
I had a high failure rate in some of my early classes.
They did not perform up to what I expected them to do, and I didn't know how to activate them.
In this course, I finally figured out a way to do it.
One of the things I told them, first day of class,
You can get a conference with me if you don't understand anything.
The first thing you need to do is get a hold of me and find out what the problem is.
I'll explain it to you.
If you can't find me in my office during regular hours, you can get a hold of me anytime at my home if I'm there up to midnight.
And they didn't believe this.
They said, you'd let somebody come by and talk to you at midnight?
Yeah, I would.
And they tried it.
And not enough did.
But...
I felt that I had a real responsibility.
I loved to teach kids in the classroom.
I loved my research too, but I had as much fun in the classroom.
But it was, I didn't get, I was never satisfied with my results.
The quality of the students in the last few years
of your service at A&M.
Compare that with the quality of the students when you first got here.
No comparison whatsoever.
They were so bad in those first few years that I don't even know how to describe it adequately.
The last few years, well, when I started teaching that organic course, I taught it for five years, that particular course.
I taught about every, I taught more courses in the chemistry department than any other professor ever has.
I created a bunch of graduate courses over there.
But when they assigned me to this sophomore organic class,
The first five years, I couldn't figure out how to get these people.
Organic chemistry is not like any other subject in the entire college curriculum.
You've got to, you can't memorize.
There's too much information.
You've got to understand, and I couldn't get these kids to
get the basic principles and use the reasoning that it took.
And so I was having an awful high
punk grade and Z's and D's, and one of the students came to me one day and said, you're not the only prof teaching this course, there are two or three others, there were.
One of these other profs, we know, all you have to do is show up in class every time and you'll make at least a B.
If you do anything extra, you get an A. And you're killing us in this class.
And I said, well, there's a simple solution to that.
Drop my course and sign up for his course.
But once I figured out how to really get...